=============================================
Yocto Project 6.0 "wrynose" is out — and I contributed!
=============================================

:date: 2026-05-13 12:00
:tags: yocto, openembedded, embedded, linux, oe-core, article
:category: Embedded Linux
:slug: yocto-project-6-0-wrynose-release
:authors: tperrot
:summary: Yocto Project 6.0 "wrynose", the new LTS release, is out today. Here is an overview of the most notable changes and a note on my own contribution to this release.
:lang: en
:status: published

The `Yocto Project 6.0`_, codenamed **wrynose**, was released on May 13, 2026. This
is the new **Long-Term Support (LTS)** release, succeeding 5.0 "scarthgap". I am
happy to have my name in the contributors list for this release, and I wanted to
take the opportunity to write a short overview of what is new.

If you are migrating from 5.0, make sure to read the migration guides for the
intermediate releases: `5.1 (styhead)`_, `5.2 (walnascar)`_, and `5.3 (whinlatter)`_.

Major component upgrades
========================

The toolchain and core components received significant version bumps:

- **Linux kernel 6.18**
- **GCC 15.2**
- **glibc 2.43**
- **LLVM/Clang 22.1.3**
- **Python 3.14.4**
- **systemd 259.5**
- **Go 1.26.2**, **Rust 1.94.1**
- **QEMU 10.2.0**
- **U-Boot 2026.01**

Over 300 recipe upgrades in total.

Rust in the Linux kernel
========================

One of the most significant additions is first-class Rust support for building the
Linux kernel and out-of-tree kernel modules:

- A new ``kernel-yocto-rust`` class adds the required dependencies to build Rust
  components of the kernel.
- A new ``module-rust`` class supports building out-of-tree Rust kernel modules. A
  skeleton example is available under ``meta-skeleton/recipes-kernel/rust-out-of-tree-module``.
- Enabling Rust in the kernel is now as simple as adding ``rust`` to
  ``KERNEL_FEATURES`` in a recipe that inherits ``kernel-yocto``.

Security improvements on by default
=====================================

Several security and hardening features that were previously opt-in are now
**enabled by default** in the nodistro setup:

- ``security_flags.inc`` — adds security-related compiler and linker flags.
- ``no-static-libs.inc`` — disables most static libraries.
- ``uninative`` — allows reuse of native sstate built on one distro on another,
  also enabled by default now.
- OpenSSL now **disables TLS 1.0/1.1 by default**.

New SBOM and CVE tooling
========================

The CVE analysis and SBOM generation story got a major overhaul:

- A new ``sbom-cve-check`` class replaces the old ``cve-check`` class for
  post-build CVE analysis of images. It uses the new ``python3-sbom-cve-check``
  tool internally.
- A new ``sbom-cve-check-recipe`` class allows CVE analysis at the recipe level,
  without building the full software.
- **SPDX 2.2 support has been dropped**; the project now supports SPDX 3 only.
- New variables ``SPDX_INCLUDE_KERNEL_CONFIG`` and ``SPDX_INCLUDE_PACKAGECONFIG``
  allow exporting richer metadata into SPDX documents.

BitBake and tooling improvements
=================================

``bitbake-setup`` received a lot of love in this release:

- Non-destructive update behavior: local commits and modifications are preserved
  during ``bitbake-setup update``.
- Shared State is now shared between builds by default (``SSTATE_DIR`` and
  ``BB_HASHSERVE_DB_DIR`` set in ``site.conf``).
- VSCode configuration files are now generated by default.
- The ``unpack_update()`` function allows updating a Git repository in-place.

WIC is now an external project
================================

The WIC image creator tool has been extracted from OpenEmbedded-Core and is now
maintained as a `standalone project`_. The recipe in OE-Core now builds from
this external source. A new ``wicenv`` image type was also added.

devtool IDE integration
========================

The ``devtool ide-sdk`` command saw several improvements:

- ``gdbserver`` attach mode support.
- GDB pretty-printing for C++ STL types.
- Kernel module development support.

What's next
===========

As an LTS release, wrynose will receive long-term maintenance. If you are on
scarthgap (5.0), now is a good time to plan your migration. The migration guide
is available at the `Yocto Project documentation`_.

.. _Yocto Project 6.0: https://www.yoctoproject.org/software-overview/downloads/
.. _5.1 (styhead): https://docs.yoctoproject.org/dev/migration-guides/migration-5.1.html
.. _5.2 (walnascar): https://docs.yoctoproject.org/dev/migration-guides/migration-5.2.html
.. _5.3 (whinlatter): https://docs.yoctoproject.org/dev/migration-guides/migration-5.3.html
.. _standalone project: https://git.yoctoproject.org/wic/
.. _Yocto Project documentation: https://docs.yoctoproject.org/dev/migration-guides/migration-6.0.html
