=======================================
RIOT-OS 2026.04 "Fire Rizzlease" is out
=======================================

:date: 2026-05-26 12:00
:tags: riot, rtos, embedded, iot, article
:category: Embedded
:slug: riot-os-2026-04-release
:authors: tperrot
:summary: RIOT-OS 2026.04 "Fire Rizzlease" is out. Here is an overview of the most notable changes in this release of the open-source IoT operating system.
:lang: en
:status: published

`RIOT-OS 2026.04`_, codenamed **Fire Rizzlease**, was released on May 6, 2026.
RIOT is a multi-threading operating system targeting microcontrollers found in the
Internet of Things — from 8-bit and 16-bit MCUs to lightweight 32-bit processors —
with a focus on energy-efficiency, soft real-time capabilities, and a small memory
footprint.

This release spans 84 days of development, 125 merged pull requests composed of 229
commits, and contributions from 27 people. A notable stat: **1,141,523 lines were
deleted** against only 25,007 inserted, largely thanks to a major vendor code cleanup.

Codeberg mirror
===============

RIOT is now synced to `Codeberg`_ (#21997). This gives the project a home on a
non-profit, community-driven forge alongside its GitHub presence, a welcome step
for an independent open-source project.

Massive EFM32 vendor code removal
==================================

Over **one million lines of vendor code** have been removed from the EFM32 family,
replaced by a ``pkg/gecko_sdk`` dependency (#22040). This is the single biggest
contributor to the impressive deletion count and results in a much leaner and more
maintainable codebase for Silicon Labs EFM32-based boards.

Raspberry Pi Pico 2 / RP2350 improvements
==========================================

The RP2350 support received a thorough overhaul (#21753):

- Unified abstractions between the RISC-V and ARM cores of the RP2350.
- Added the XH3IRQ interrupt controller.
- Updated UART driver.
- Added RISC-V support.

The scope of this work was large enough to inspire `a bachelor's thesis`_ at
HAW Hamburg.

New board and CPU support
=========================

Three new targets join the supported hardware list:

- **pro-micro-nrf52840** (#22089) — a popular nRF52840-based Pro Micro form-factor board.
- **slstk3301a** (#22069) — Silicon Labs EFM32 Tiny Gecko starter kit.
- **STM32H7** (#21978) — high-performance STM32 family, with additional peripheral
  support for the nucleo-h753zi (#22076).

New device drivers
==================

- **AMG88xx** (#22104) — infrared array sensor (thermal camera) from Panasonic.
- **ADS1X1X** (#21694) — family of Texas Instruments I²C ADCs.

Guide site and documentation
=============================

The `RIOT Guide Site`_ continues to grow as the default entry point for new users,
progressively replacing Doxygen for prose documentation. This release adds:

- More tutorials.
- An experimental `Supported Boards`_ section.
- Unit tests in tutorials (#22042).
- Updated Astro v6 framework (#22145).

The Doxygen API reference remains available at `api.riot-os.org`_.

Networking improvements
=======================

Several additions to the GNRC networking stack:

- New ``gnrc_pktshark`` module to pretty-print network traffic (#21284).
- ``gnrc_ipv6_nib_dyn_lladdr_get()`` API (#22013).
- ABR (Authoritative Border Router) now run-time configurable (#21081).
- Generic UDP shell command (#22049).

Notable bug fixes
=================

43 bugs were fixed in this release, including:

- ESP8266 crashes on reboot and startup (#22014, #22010).
- Potential buffer overflow in the atwinc15x0 driver (#22041).
- NanoCoAP message corruption in ``coap_build_reply()`` (#22094).
- Wrong byte order for gyro and accelerometer reads in the MPU-9x50 driver (#22135).
- LVGL configuration and SDL issues on native (#22005, #22139).

.. _RIOT-OS 2026.04: https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/releases/tag/2026.04
.. _Codeberg: https://codeberg.org/riot/riot
.. _a bachelor's thesis: https://inet.haw-hamburg.de/thesis/completed/ba_hert_tom.pdf/view
.. _RIOT Guide Site: https://guide.riot-os.org/
.. _Supported Boards: https://guide.riot-os.org/boards/
.. _api.riot-os.org: https://api.riot-os.org/
